[Music]
hey everyone i'm harrison co-founder and
chief customer officer huddle thank you
so much for joining this webinar today
and today we're gonna be talking about
churn and a little on paddle just just
before we kick off so paddle is a SAS
Coburn's platform we handle checkout
payments invoicing tax billing and more
all for software companies and we do
this so they can focus on growing their
business without getting held back by
tooling and infrastructure and today
that the big topic is us talking about
chair and reduction and we're in a
unique position to talk about churn and
SAS metrics of padl given we power the
financials for thousands of SAS
companies on our platform but of course
if also analyzing from work with many
others and before I kick off do ask
questions via the Q&A throughout I'll do
my level best to fly through this in
time throughout to answer some of you
and so do you just keep sticking those
in there as we run through the content
so why are we talking about churn today
I mean I'm sure you may have noticed the
currently living in a global crisis of
enormous scale and this is having a huge
impact on each and every one of our
businesses and it's more important than
ever during this time to ensure we
ensure that we obtain the customers
you've worked so hard to acquire in the
first place to share with you kind of
the scale of that problem I got
permission to share the stage with you
from my friends at profit well this is
the profit well subscription index some
of you may have even seen this earlier
in in Patrick's talk and if you didn't
get the chance said to catch side I
recommend you check it out but the too
long didn't read here is that March 2020
was some of the biggest months of churn
in SAS history and of course there are
winners and losers in this mix but the
outlook is a little bleak and it's yet
to be seen how long things would take to
rebound and we may be seeing high levels
of churn at that index but also our
ability to acquire customers has been
hit hard and harder than ever
I'm delighted and proud to be a part of
the revenue collective this is an
invite-only platform for revenue leaders
and I recommend it to absolutely
everyone and you guys this thing today
the survey of the
the revenue collective told us that 96%
of revenue leaders say they've been
impacted by code in 1972 percent of
respondents has adjusted revenue targets
and forecasts or at least expect to soon
and the vast majority of those have done
so by reducing it between 25 and 50
percent only a handful have seen a
benefit and are increasing their
forecast during this time there's always
a slack or a zoom in one of these
crisises that this is a difficult time
to be acquiring new logos or even
expanding NRL within existing accounts
so what do we do I mean we've just heard
that retention is it almost worse than
ever
and it's really really difficult for us
to be acquiring that new customers on
that new logos so what are our options
we could increase acquisition or
expansion by you know 14 percent each
month in this climate but that's gonna
be damn tough given most folks reducing
their targets not increasing them or we
could reach the same outcomes by
decreasing our monthly churn by one
percent and that's something that I
think we can do and can achieve and
pretty quickly with some of the
actionable advice that we're gonna run
through today if anything when you go
back to your teams are after this
message today I want your message to
them to be to make sure that during this
tough climate for all of us we're not
making our lives even harder by losing
the customers we've worked so hard to
gain our that kind of back door
completely unnecessarily in this period
of survival it's more important than
ever to cling on to the customs we've
already worked so hard to win how're we
gonna do this what are our strategies
for churn in q2 2020 now there's a ton
of content on churn out there I'm sure
many of you have read a huge amount of
this is on the fantastic marginal gains
we can all adopt during peacetime and to
continue to improve our dollar attention
and grow our businesses however a lot of
the most impactful things we can do to
reduce churn I feel don't get half as
much airtime and I want to focus on some
of those really impactful topics today
but before we dive deep into that stuff
just some
quick reminders and definitions some of
you may be familiar with this so firstly
I want to draw your attention to what we
call voluntary churn this is sometimes
known as active churn these are
customers actively looking to cancel
their subscriptions they're hid in your
account area and hitting that cancel
button perhaps they're calling you up
and requesting to cancel their
subscription they're actually doing so
we call this active churn occasionally
the second type of churn is involuntary
churn this is sometimes sometimes known
as delinquent churn these are customers
whose subscriptions are canceling due to
failed payments our inability to charge
them and I think these these may be
definitions that some of you are
familiar with when thinking about our
strategies we also need to acknowledge
when the churn is happening and that's
really important I want you to think
about that as we move through this
content is this a preacher event before
the subscription renewal is due or is it
a post churner then so after the
subscription your lists canceled or has
failed already this is really important
I think it's most helpful fuel to start
thinking about this as a matrix and this
is something you can take away with you
today with the four quadrants of this
matrix you can broadly start to group
your churn strategies together and
always even more importantly spot where
you're missing out where you've got room
for improvement and today we're going to
deep dive into some of these and before
quantifying the dollar impact each of
these can have on on your business
immediately but before we run through
them and down little deeper that's just
run to reach them first and foremost so
firstly you should too going to reduce
churn you should be trying to keep your
existing users happy and engaged and
running your nurture programs engaging
all the time trying to improve feature
adoption maybe upgrading them from a
monthly to an annual plan this is the
basic bread and butter of the customer
success and account teams if you have
today next to kind of reduce show me
what me thinking about cancellation
offers when a customer hits that cancel
button and we're trying to find out why
and more importantly are we trying to
make them offers or giving them
suggestions to deflect the cancellation
request I've seen case studies and
figures of up to 15% of cancellations
deflected and there's a bunch of tools
out there to actually assist you with
that
and some of them even written a
amount of content about their products
in light of covert 19 third we've got
payment acceptance this is stopping
subscription payments subscription
payments from failing and the chen
that's happening in the first place a
clear clad preacher and prevention
strategy and lastly this work on payment
recovery this is recovering failed
payments after the fact now your goal
should of course to build a complete
chairman action strategy across all four
of these quadrants and in doing so
you'll maximize your chances to reduce
churn and improve revenue retention
which should be a real focus of yours
right now and each of these quadrants
also has different metrics and you're
gonna need to determine these to work
out how you're actually performing today
where is there room for improvement and
in doing so you can start to also
measure the uplift that we can bring
about through some of the suggestions
that we're gonna cover i'd recommend you
start with your lagging indicators it's
your past failures which are a strong
indicator of your future failures and
it's also the areas in which i think we
can make the biggest impact most quickly
so i'm talking about looking at things
like your number of cancellations your
number of failed payments and the number
of failed payments you've actually
recovered today we're gonna be looking
at involuntary churn and very
specifically typically you can expect
twenty to forty percent of your overall
churn to be involuntary particularly if
you take payments through cards which
I'm sure a huge amount of you out there
listening to they do so here in front of
us on on the screen we have an example
of a seller without any churn
optimization before benefiting from the
tooling the experiments at paddle we've
run around chair and across the hundreds
of millions and dollars in error are
that runs through our platform now what
makes things feel worse for this example
seller is that these customers are
churning without any decision making or
any active effort to cancel on their
side this is involuntary and and that
twenty to 40 percent involuntary churn
figure is an industry standard and it's
absolutely heartbreaking to see SAS
folks scrambling for revenue during this
really tough time and and seeing this
involuntary figure this high but this
also an opportunity for us to improve
and I think when going away and trying
to check your own involuntary turn
figure something to bear in mind is that
that percentage will will vary from
month to month and I think the real
topic of conversation today is you know
most importantly what can we do about it
and wouldn't it be great if we could
stop those payments failing in the first
place and avoiding that involuntary
churn and most SAS companies and content
in the market are aware of and focus on
Dunning on payment recovery this is
solving the mess after it's happened
after the payment it's failed trying to
trying our level best to recover it it's
almost too late but the problem of
prepayment acceptance preempts that it's
a preacher and strategy it's looking our
ability to actually charge the customer
in the first place this is much more
impactful with many more dollars at
stake and we're going to start to
quantify this stuff in just a moment for
those of you unfamiliar with payment
acceptance I thought some brief info and
it could be helpful here payment
acceptance is ultimately the measure of
the number of successful charges you
make over the number of attempts and
this is something that you should
measure on your initial transactions
those initial purchases as initial
subscribers as well as your recurring
payments because your performance error
is going to look very different I'm
happy to help each of your as many as I
possibly can understand your own kind of
payment acceptance just as just after
this webinar on it I'd love you to reach
out and we can work through that
together and there's four main drivers
to improve payment acceptance and I'm
going to briefly run through each
starting with payment methods so the
first way you can improve payment
acceptance is by looking at how your
customers are paying today and remember
for improving that payment acceptance
figure we're introducing that a
voluntary churn and retain more of our
dollars by looking at payment methods
it's those with a direct source of funds
which will have much better payment
acceptance ie they're less likely to
fail and examples of payment methods
with the direct source of funds are a
digital wallet or a direct debit
say from a bank account or a wire
transfer
bank account now what evidence that do I
have that these these subsequent methods
can improve payment acceptance well a
paddle we see more than 2x the
proportion of failed payments from card
transactions compared for something like
PayPal which is an example of a digital
wallet and we've measured this across
the hundreds of millions in Safra that's
revenue that runs through the paddle
platform and it's worth noting that some
of those digital wallet super popular as
well from an acquisition perspective we
see stats like 70% of transactions in
Germany which are under $50 take place
via PayPal so not only is taking a
payment via PayPal gonna help you with
retention later down the line actually
offering options like that are probably
going to help you that position in the
first place it's on some of the higher
ATVs and you'll expect to think more
about some of those those other options
like direct debits and wire transfers an
extra fee for improving payment
acceptance and thus reducing that
involuntary churn figure is updating
expired cards it's ensuring the card
you're trying to charge on file are
actually up to date and usable
anti-fraud laws mandate the cards must
expire within three years of being
issued and I'm not sure what some of
your own experiences are but
increasingly we're seeing the periods in
which cards are active actually decrease
in length due to some of these
anti-fraud measures what does this mean
that this means that an average of one
in 36 if your customer cards on file
could be expiring each month and that's
the four being excluded some of the
other factors and those cancelling them
early we need to make sure ever to
charge these the charge customers
despite these expire ease and that's to
really clear and obvious ways to do that
and the first one which I'm sure many of
you have thought of as encouraging
customers to update their card details
in advance of charging them if those
card details have expired typically your
payment provider will share them for
when a card is due to expire
use this information to programmatically
or even manually send out a note to the
customer in advance than being charged
if you know it's gonna fail because the
cards expired encourage them to simply
update that payment method perhaps you
could even encourage them to update to a
payment method with a direct source of
funds like we just discussed because
your acceptance rates there are also
better now that's an option that many
folks have thought of but bet better yet
and what you're seeing a visual
representation of on the screen is that
many cars these days can be
automatically updated through connected
bank networks which which happen when
new cards are issued and our ones are
expired most payment processes offer
this so customers can continue to be
charged without even needing to re-enter
their new card details and but you can
only expect a fraction of your car
bought at any one time to be updated
this technology's relatively new and
getting better all the time
the third strategy we have around
improving payment acceptance and thus
reducing that involuntary churn figure
is payment routing and this is my
personal favor and the one that has the
biggest dollar impact on you and your
business for car payments we see big
differences in payment acceptance across
different geographies this is usually
due to the lack of relationship you as a
seller have with local banks in
different countries currencies and over
different card networks to help me this
a little clearer or help folks
understand it it basically becomes
harder to draw a path between the
acquiring bank your bank and payment
infrastructure and the issuing Bank of
the customers card this means that the
payments are more likely to fail ie the
payment acceptance figure is going to be
worse it's also more likely that these
transactions well it's hard to draw this
path get flagged for fraud and again
this is another thing that's going to
reduce your payment settings and not for
involuntary churn figure out how do we
resolve this and resolve this by working
with local acquirers and to really
quantify this or put this into context
paddle when we a be tested local
acquiring in the u.s. a puddle which
means running us transaction so us
buyers who are purchasing products in
the US for US banks tied to us entities
and as opposed to generic global
accounts which could have been based in
Europe UK or anywhere we saw a three
percent lift in payment acceptance on
subscription renewals and a twenty
percent lift in first-time purchases of
subscriptions for an initial check out
our initial enrollment in that
subscription these these numbers numbers
are astronomical
this translate
directly into three percent less mor
churn across all our sellers for their
us-based customers and compounds to over
30 percent less ARR churn within 12
months this is a hugely significant
amount of revenue view guys which we're
missing out on if we if we neglect
payment acceptance and don't look to
address this problem sorry I'd skip the
slide there
this is drawing a path between the the
local charging and and this is a similar
one we're going to talk about currencies
now and this is the final strategy for
improving payment acceptance you guys
need to make sure you're charging in
local currencies when payments are in
the international market so you've got
customers all over the world and when
payments are in these international
markets we typically see payments made
in local currencies as 1 to 2 percent
more likely to be successful although in
some regions that lifts up to 9 percent
so please please stop charging everyone
in USD people like I see all the time
and it's not helping you and the
Japanese want yen and the Germans want
euros and offering and charging
customers in these local currencies
number one you can o acquire customers
more effectively because they want to
see prices and they want to pay in their
local currency but you're also gonna be
helped later down the line as well
because on renewal every time you try to
charge that customer your likelihood of
success is going to increase if you're
charging them in in their local currency
now this data is pretty hard to
generalize and and that's because all of
you listening out there around different
companies with different customers and
different customer demographics and
customer profiles and have different
splits of transactions going to
different payment methods and this makes
my job a little tougher and in general
before folks start using paddle we're
seeing 3 percent monthly churn due to
poor payment acceptance and fail
payments again this equates the more
than 30 percent annual churn from failed
subscription payments which is something
that we can fix and do something about
now we've built a calculator to help
each of you answer questions around this
and calculate your own performance so
you can make this relevant to you and
your businesses and see how much money
you guys are leaving on the table and
there's more on that in just a moment
so today we talked about payment
acceptance really really specifically
but this is just one of many different
ways to improve churn these techniques
can reduce churn between 5% to 30% on
your era and this is big money we're
leaving on the table during a tough time
and we can help you roll some of this
stuff out within weeks and I'd
absolutely love and be thrilled to help
some of you quantify the dollar churn
you're losing out on due to
infrastructure and some of the things
that we discuss today and if you visit
the link on screen you're gonna head
through through to our dollar attention
calculator or you can start to fill in
some information completely self-serve
about your current customers and your
current go to market and that's going to
give you an idea of how much money
you're leaving on the table due to this
poor infrastructure and things like
paying acceptance there's also gonna be
some folks on hand to help and guide you
through I really want the key takeaway
from today to be during a time when it's
tougher than ever to acquire customers
and folks are more likely to churn than
ever before let's be doing our absolute
best to cling on to the folks that we
already have and not be losing out on
these these passive customers who were
churning and to involuntary churn right
now let's go away and fix that problem
thank you so much for listing I'm hoping
I've at least got a minute or so for a
couple of questions I'll do my best to
get to stuff before I'm and shouted at
and kicked off you do have time for a
couple questions and you have some
people in the queue a have a very
similar question they want to know how
how do the different currencies apply
for the enterprise versus SMB and so
lots of this stuff really does differ
depending on whether you're but based on
your go-to-market and the types of
customers you're serving and there's a
lot of variables here so customers who
are wanting to pay higher amounts are
gonna want to pay their different
payment methods things like the impact
currencies can have on acceptance and
even acquisition in the first place
again are going to differ based in your
ACB so I'd encourage you to jump onto
that and calculator that we just linked
before and you'll be able to type in the
information about how many customers you
have how much they're typically paying
and it should be able to make a really
good estimate view as to what impact
this can have your business based on the
actuals of your business rather than me
trying to fly through an answer on this
straight way okay you have a couple more
I'm gonna try and squeeze in here the
slides the slides will be available
Wilson Wilson the mountain in the
recording so you guys can re-watch
paracin there's a good one here which is
how does payment acceptance change
across countries and regions and that's
a really great question and payment
acceptance is gonna differ per region
based on but the biggest thing is if
you're not working with local acquirers
and you're trying to charge all these
customers from where have you set up
your entity and your payment provider
right now any country outside of the one
you currently set up in is gonna be
being negatively impact gt2 to not
working with with local acquirers and
you're gonna see varying performance the
country but all of them will be affected
and other than the one that you're
actually currently sets up in that's a
great question I think you have time for
one more if you want to pick the last
question sure we've got what are the
digital wallet options for enterprise
accounts and SAS this is an interesting
question as well because again digital
wallets are something we know that often
have a direct source of funds and
improved payment acceptance and I think
there are actually a ton of digital
wallet options out there available and
and we should think about which ones are
popular with b2c like PayPal and also
which ones are popular with enterprise
which is the question and actually that
is often going to differ per per Geo so
we see digital wallets like Sephora in
Germany as popular and ideal in the
Netherlands this popular these most
importantly have a direct source of
funds and will improve payments but
again more than happy to talk about this
stuff just afterwards anyone this thing
please do drop me a line on on that
email address you're seeing there and
I'd love to continue chatting about this
stuff yeah thanks for being so open with
our audience will definitely spend the
other questions that came in to Harrison
so that he can follow up with you guys I
know he's excited to talk to all of you
yeah thanks so much for joining Harrison
that was super important good
informative um stay safe I know you're
in New York which is
hot spot right now in the US so stay
safe thank you for joining and we'll see
you guys at our next session thanks
again thank you everyone it's been a
pleasure
[Music]